===========================================
Tutorial 7 - Get this (third)-party started
===========================================

So far, the app we've built has only used our own code, plus the code provided
by BeeWare. However, in a real-world app, you'll likely want to use a
third-party library, downloaded from the Python Package Index (PyPI).

Let's modify our app to include a third-party library.

Adding a package
================

Let's modify our application to say a little bit more than just "Hi, there!".

To generate some more interesting text for the dialog, we're going to use a
library called `Faker <https://faker.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`__ . Faker is a
Python package that generates fake content, including names and text blocks. The
names and words in the text block are generated from an arbitrary list of words
provided by Faker. We're going to use Faker to construct a fake message, as if
someone is responding to the user.

We start by adding ``faker`` to our app. Add an import to the top of the
``app.py`` to import ``faker``::

    import faker

Then modify the ``say_hello()`` callback so it looks like this::

    async def say_hello(self, widget):
        fake = faker.Faker()
        await self.main_window.dialog(
            toga.InfoDialog(
                greeting(self.name_input.value),
                f"A message from {fake.name()}: {fake.text()}",
            )
        )

Lets run our updated app in Briefcase developer mode to check that our change
has worked.

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: console

      (beeware-venv) $ briefcase dev
      Traceback (most recent call last):
      File ".../venv/bin/briefcase", line 5, in <module>
          from briefcase.__main__ import main
      File ".../venv/lib/python3.13/site-packages/briefcase/__main__.py", line 3, in <module>
          from .cmdline import parse_cmdline
      File ".../venv/lib/python3.13/site-packages/briefcase/cmdline.py", line 6, in <module>
          from briefcase.commands import DevCommand, NewCommand, UpgradeCommand
      File ".../venv/lib/python3.13/site-packages/briefcase/commands/__init__.py", line 1, in <module>
          from .build import BuildCommand  # noqa
      File ".../venv/lib/python3.13/site-packages/briefcase/commands/build.py", line 5, in <module>
          from .base import BaseCommand, full_options
      File ".../venv/lib/python3.13/site-packages/briefcase/commands/base.py", line 14, in <module>
          import faker
      ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'faker'

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: console

      (beeware-venv) $ briefcase dev
      Traceback (most recent call last):
      File ".../venv/bin/briefcase", line 5, in <module>
          from briefcase.__main__ import main
      File ".../venv/lib/python3.13/site-packages/briefcase/__main__.py", line 3, in <module>
          from .cmdline import parse_cmdline
      File ".../venv/lib/python3.13/site-packages/briefcase/cmdline.py", line 6, in <module>
          from briefcase.commands import DevCommand, NewCommand, UpgradeCommand
      File ".../venv/lib/python3.13/site-packages/briefcase/commands/__init__.py", line 1, in <module>
          from .build import BuildCommand  # noqa
      File ".../venv/lib/python3.13/site-packages/briefcase/commands/build.py", line 5, in <module>
          from .base import BaseCommand, full_options
      File ".../venv/lib/python3.13/site-packages/briefcase/commands/base.py", line 14, in <module>
          import faker
      ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'faker'

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: doscon

      (beeware-venv) C:\...>briefcase dev
      Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "...\venv\bin\briefcase", line 5, in <module>
          from briefcase.__main__ import main
      File "...\venv\lib\python3.13\site-packages\briefcase\__main__.py", line 3, in <module>
          from .cmdline import parse_cmdline
      File "...\venv\lib\python3.13\site-packages\briefcase\cmdline.py", line 6, in <module>
          from briefcase.commands import DevCommand, NewCommand, UpgradeCommand
      File "...\venv\lib\python3.13\site-packages\briefcase\commands\__init__.py", line 1, in <module>
          from .build import BuildCommand  # noqa
      File "...\venv\lib\python3.13\site-packages\briefcase\commands\build.py", line 5, in <module>
          from .base import BaseCommand, full_options
      File "...\venv\lib\python3.13\site-packages\briefcase\commands\base.py", line 14, in <module>
          import faker
      ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'faker'

What happened? We've added ``faker`` to our *code*, but we haven't added it to
our development virtual environment. We can fix this by installing ``faker``
with ``pip``, and then re-running ``briefcase dev``:

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: console

      (beeware-venv) $ python -m pip install faker
      (beeware-venv) $ briefcase dev

    When you enter a name and press the button, you should see a dialog that
    looks something like:

    .. image:: images/macOS/tutorial-7.png
       :align: center
       :alt: Hello World Tutorial 7 dialog, on macOS

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: console

      (beeware-venv) $ python -m pip install faker
      (beeware-venv) $ briefcase dev

    When you enter a name and press the button, you should see a dialog that
    looks something like:

    .. image:: images/linux/tutorial-7.png
       :align: center
       :alt: Hello World Tutorial 7 dialog, on Linux

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: doscon

      (beeware-venv) C:\...>python -m pip install faker
      (beeware-venv) C:\...>briefcase dev

    When you enter a name and press the button, you should see a dialog that
    looks something like:

    .. image:: images/windows/tutorial-7.png
       :align: center
       :alt: Hello World Tutorial 7 dialog, on Windows

We've now got a working app, using a third party library, running in development mode!

Running the updated app
=======================

Let's get this updated application code packaged as a standalone app. Since
we've made code changes, we need to follow the same steps as in :doc:`Tutorial 4 <tutorial-4>`:

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    Update the code in the packaged app:

    .. code-block:: console

      (beeware-venv) $ briefcase update

      [helloworld] Updating application code...
      ...

      [helloworld] Application updated.

    Rebuild the app:

    .. code-block:: console

      (beeware-venv) $ briefcase build

      [helloworld] Adhoc signing app...
      [helloworld] Built build/helloworld/macos/app/Hello World.app

    And finally, run the app:

    .. code-block:: console

      (beeware-venv) $ briefcase run

      [helloworld] Starting app...
      ===========================================================================

    However, when the app runs, you'll see an error in the console, plus a crash
    dialog:

    .. image:: images/macOS/tutorial-7-crash.png
       :align: center
       :alt: Hello World Tutorial 7 app crash, on macOS

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    Update the code in the packaged app:

    .. code-block:: console

      (beeware-venv) $ briefcase update

      [helloworld] Updating application code...
      ...

      [helloworld] Application updated.

    Rebuild the app:

    .. code-block:: console

      (beeware-venv) $ briefcase build

      [helloworld] Finalizing application configuration...
      ...

      [helloworld] Building application...
      ...

      [helloworld] Built build/helloworld/linux/ubuntu/jammy/helloworld-0.0.1/usr/bin/helloworld

    And finally, run the app:

    .. code-block:: console

      (beeware-venv) $ briefcase run

      [helloworld] Starting app...
      ===========================================================================

    However, when the app runs, you'll see an error in the console:

    .. code-block:: console

      Traceback (most recent call last):
        File "/usr/lib/python3.13/runpy.py", line 194, in _run_module_as_main
          return _run_code(code, main_globals, None,
        File "/usr/lib/python3.13/runpy.py", line 87, in _run_code
          exec(code, run_globals)
        File "/home/brutus/beeware-tutorial/helloworld/build/linux/ubuntu/jammy/helloworld-0.0.1/usr/app/hello_world/__main__.py", line 1, in <module>
          from helloworld.app import main
        File "/home/brutus/beeware-tutorial/helloworld/build/linux/ubuntu/jammy/helloworld-0.0.1/usr/app/hello_world/app.py", line 8, in <module>
          import faker
      ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'faker'

      Unable to start app helloworld.

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    Update the code in the packaged app:

    .. code-block:: doscon

      (beeware-venv) C:\...>briefcase update

      [helloworld] Updating application code...
      ...

      [helloworld] Application updated.

    Rebuild the app:

    .. code-block:: doscon

      (beeware-venv) C:\...>briefcase build
      ...

      [helloworld] Built build\helloworld\windows\app\src\Toga Test.exe

    And finally, run the app:

    .. code-block:: doscon

      (beeware-venv) C:\...>briefcase run

      [helloworld] Starting app...
      ===========================================================================

    However, when the app runs, you'll see an error in the console, plus a crash
    dialog:

    .. image:: images/windows/tutorial-7-crash.png
       :align: center
       :alt: Hello World Tutorial 7 app crash, on Windows

Once again, the app has failed to start because ``faker`` has not been installed -
but why? Haven't we already installed ``faker``?

We have - but only in the development environment. Your development environment
is entirely local to your machine - and is only enabled when you explicitly
activate it. Although Briefcase has a development mode, the main reason you'd
use Briefcase is to package up your code so you can give it to someone else.

The only way to guarantee that someone else will have a Python environment that
contains everything it needs is to build a completely isolated Python
environment. This means there's a completely isolated Python install, and a
completely isolated set of dependencies. This is what Briefcase is building when
you run ``briefcase build`` - an isolated Python environment. This also explains
why ``faker`` isn't installed - it has been installed in your *development*
environment, but not in the packaged app.

So - we need to tell Briefcase that our app has an external dependency.

Updating dependencies
=====================

In the root directory of your app, there is a file named ``pyproject.toml``.
This file contains all the app configuration details that you provided when
you originally ran ``briefcase new``.

``pyproject.toml`` is broken up into sections; one of the sections describes
the settings for your app::

    [tool.briefcase.app.helloworld]
    formal_name = "Hello World"
    description = "A Tutorial app"
    long_description = """More details about the app should go here.
    """
    sources = ["src/helloworld"]
    requires = []

The ``requires`` option describes the dependencies of our application. It is
a list of strings, specifying libraries (and, optionally, versions) of libraries
that you want to be included with your app.

Modify the ``requires`` setting so that it reads::

    requires = [
        "faker",
    ]

By adding this setting, we're telling Briefcase "when you build my app, run
``pip install faker`` into the application bundle". Anything that would be legal
input to ``pip install`` can be used here - so, you could specify:

* A specific library version (e.g., ``"faker==37.3.0"``);
* A range of library versions (e.g., ``"faker>=37"``);
* A path to a git repository (e.g., ``"git+https://github.com/joke2k/faker/"``);
  or
* A local file path (However - be warned: if you give your code to someone
  else, this path probably won't exist on their machine!)

Further down in ``pyproject.toml``, you'll notice other sections that are
operating system dependent, like ``[tool.briefcase.app.helloworld.macOS]`` and
``[tool.briefcase.app.helloworld.windows]``. These sections *also* have a
``requires`` setting. These settings allow you to define additional
platform-specific dependencies - so, for example, if you need a
platform-specific library to handle some aspect of your app, you can specify
that library in the platform-specific ``requires`` section, and that setting
will only be used for that platform. You will notice that the ``toga`` libraries
are all specified in the platform-specific ``requires`` section - this is
because the libraries needed to display a user interface are platform specific.

In our case, we want ``faker`` to be installed on all platforms, so we use the
app-level ``requires`` setting. The app-level dependencies will always be
installed; the platform-specific dependencies are installed *in addition* to the
app-level ones.

Now that we've told Briefcase about our additional requirements, we can try
packaging our app again. Ensure that you've saved your changes to
``pyproject.toml``, and then update your app again - this time, passing in the
``-r`` flag. This tells Briefcase to update requirements in the packaged app:

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: console

      (beeware-venv) $ briefcase update -r

      [helloworld] Updating application code...
      Installing src/hello_world...

      [helloworld] Updating requirements...
      Collecting faker
        Using cached faker-37.3.0-py3-none-any.whl.metadata (15 kB)
      ...
      Installing collected packages: tzdata, travertino, std-nslog, rubicon-objc, fonttools, toga-core, faker, toga-cocoa
      Successfully installed faker-37.3.0 fonttools-4.58.1 rubicon-objc-0.5.1 std-nslog-1.0.3 toga-cocoa-0.5.1 toga-core-0.5.1 travertino-0.5.1 tzdata-2025.2

      [helloworld] Removing unneeded app content...
      ...

      [helloworld] Application updated.

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: console

      (beeware-venv) $ briefcase update -r

      [helloworld] Finalizing application configuration...
      Targeting ubuntu:jammy (Vendor base debian)
      Determining glibc version... done
      Targeting glibc 2.35
      Targeting Python3.13

      [helloworld] Updating application code...
      Installing src/hello_world...

      [helloworld] Updating requirements...
      Collecting faker
        Using cached faker-37.3.0-py3-none-any.whl.metadata (15 kB)
      ...
      Installing collected packages: tzdata, travertino, std-nslog, rubicon-objc, fonttools, toga-core, faker, toga-cocoa
      Successfully installed faker-37.3.0 fonttools-4.58.1 rubicon-objc-0.5.1 std-nslog-1.0.3 toga-cocoa-0.5.1 toga-core-0.5.1 travertino-0.5.1 tzdata-2025.2

      [helloworld] Removing unneeded app content...
      ...

      [helloworld] Application updated.

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: doscon

      (beeware-venv) C:\...>briefcase update -r

      [helloworld] Updating application code...
      Installing src/helloworld...

      [helloworld] Updating requirements...
      Collecting faker
        Using cached faker-37.3.0-py3-none-any.whl.metadata (15 kB)
      ...
      Installing collected packages: tzdata, travertino, std-nslog, rubicon-objc, fonttools, toga-core, faker, toga-cocoa
      Successfully installed faker-37.3.0 fonttools-4.58.1 rubicon-objc-0.5.1 std-nslog-1.0.3 toga-cocoa-0.5.1 toga-core-0.5.1 travertino-0.5.1 tzdata-2025.2

      [helloworld] Removing unneeded app content...
      ...

      [helloworld] Application updated.

Once you've updated, you can run ``briefcase build`` and ``briefcase run`` - and
you should see your packaged app, with the new dialog behavior.

.. note::

    The ``-r`` option for updating requirements is also honored by the ``build`` and
    ``run`` command, so if you want to update, build, and run in one step, you could
    use ``briefcase run -u -r``.

Third-Party Python Packages for Mobile and Web
==============================================

Faker is just one example of a third-party Python package - a collection of code
that isn't part what Python provides out of the box. These third-party packages
are most commonly distributed using the `Python Package Index (PyPI)
<https://pypi.org>`__, and installed into your local virtual environment. We've
been using ``pip`` in this tutorial, but there are other options.

On desktop platforms (macOS, Windows, Linux), essentially any package on PyPI
package can be installed into your virtual environment, or added to your app's
requirements. However, when building an app for mobile or web platforms, `your
options are slightly limited
<https://briefcase.readthedocs.io/en/latest/background/faq.html#can-i-use-third-party-python-packages-in-my-app>`__.

In short; any *pure Python* package (i.e. any package created from a project
written *only* in Python) can be used without difficulty. Some packages, though,
are created from projects that contain both Python and other languages (e.g. C,
C++, Rust, etc). Code written in those languages needs to be compiled to
platform-specific binary modules before it can be used, and those pre-compiled
binary modules are only available on specific platforms. Mobile and web
platforms have very different requirements than "standard" desktop platforms. At
this time, most Python packages don't provide pre-compiled binaries for mobile
and web platforms.

On PyPI, packages are often provided in a pre-built distribution format called
*wheels*. To check whether a package is pure Python, look at the PyPI downloads
page for the project. If the wheels provided have a ``-py3-none-any.whl`` suffix
(e.g., `Faker <https://pypi.org/project/Faker/37.3.0/#files>`__), then they are
pure Python wheels. However, if the wheels have version and platform-specific
extensions (e.g., `Pillow <https://pypi.org/project/pillow/11.2.1/#files>`__,
which has wheels with suffixes like ``-cp313-cp313-macosx_11_0_arm64.whl`` and
``-cp39-cp39-win_amd64.whl``), then the wheel *contains a binary component*.
That package cannot be installed on mobile or web platforms unless a wheel
compatible with those platforms has been provided.

At this time, *most* binary packages on PyPI don't provide mobile- or
web-compatible wheels. To fill this gap, BeeWare provides binaries for some
popular binary modules (including ``numpy``, ``pandas``, and ``cryptography``).
These wheels are *not* distributed on PyPI, but Briefcase will install those
wheels if they're available.

It's *usually* possible to compile binary packages for mobile platforms, but
it's not easy to set up -- well outside the scope of an introductory tutorial
like this one.

Next steps
==========

We've now got an app that uses a third-party library! In :doc:`Tutorial 8
<tutorial-8>` we'll learn how to ensure our app remains responsive as we add
more complex application logic.
